-------- THE STEEM ENGINE --------

By Anthony and Russell Hayward

http://steem.atari.org/
http://www.blimey.strayduck.com/


Thank you for downloading the STE Emulating Engine, which from now on I
will call Steem to save my precious typing fingers. Our aim is to make
Steem the most accurate and easy to use emulator possible.

Steem is freeware, you don't have to pay anything or do anything to
entitle you to use the program. However if you like it, or if you don't,
you can e-mail us your thoughts.

We've tried to make Steem as straight forward as possible, so I will not
go into great detail about anything. :-)

---- WHAT'S IT FOR? ----

An ST Emulator attempts to recreate the Atari ST computer in software on
a PC. This means you can play your favourite ST games and even run
applications without needing an ST, in fact it is often more pleasant
using an emulator (none of those horrible mouse ports to fight with)!
With Steem running you will have a window on your desktop that works
just like an ST display.

---- TROUBLESHOOTING ----

If you have problems running Steem look in the faq.txt file, that covers
the most common difficulties and what you can do about them. If you
can't find the answer in there then check the website FAQ: 

http://www.blimey.strayduck.com/faq.htm

If that is no good then send an e-mail to steem@gmx.net with a full
description of your problem and we'll try to sort it out if we can.

---- STARTING AND STOPPING ----

The main window contains the ST display and a toolbar. Click on the
green play button with the left mouse button to start emulation.
Immediately your mouse cursor will disappear, so you can control the ST
cursor. To get your PC mouse back again press the Pause/Break key.
Emulation will still continue while your mouse is running free, you can
click anywhere on the ST display or press Pause/Break again to regain
control of the ST mouse. To stop emulation either click the run button
again or press Shift + Pause/Break. If you right click on this button
then you can run Steem in slow motion, this is useful if you want to
take a screenshot or see something that disappears very quickly.

If you are used to the first Win32 ST Emulator, WinSTon, you might want
to use F12 to release the mouse - you can use one of Steem's features to
allow this (see the shortcuts section below).

---- FAST FORWARD ----

Lots of ST games have tedious animated intro sequences that can last for
minutes or even days. Press and hold the red fast-forward button and
Steem will go full-steam ahead to get through it as soon as possible. If
you right click on this button Steem will do a searchlight fast forward.
Some programs can stop with a black screen, you have no idea whether
they have crashed or are waiting for you to do something. Searchlight
causes the ST screen to be displayed with different colours so you can
see whatever is on it and work out what to do.

---- RESET ST ----

The button to the right of fast forward resets the ST, a left mouse
click causes a cold reset (the same as turning the ST off, waiting 30
seconds and then turning it on again) and a right click causes a warm
reset (the same as pressing the reset button on the back of the ST). By
the way, if anyone can come up with a better standard 20-colour, 16x16
icon to represent reset then please send it to us!
(mailto:steem@gmx.net)

---- LOAD/SAVE MEMORY SNAPSHOT ----

The camera button on the Steem toolbar brings up a menu from which you
can load and save memory snapshots. Save snapshot will save out the
current state of the ST to a file. This can be useful for games without
save facilities. When you load a snapshot it will change your TOS
version, monitor type, memory size and the current disks in the drives.
The last 10 snapshots that have been used appear also on this menu so
you can quickly reload them.

---- PASTE TEXT INTO ST ----

This button allows you to quickly and easily paste text from Windows
into the ST. Just click on the button and Steem will type in the text at
incredible speed. Some programs may struggle with the top speed, to slow
it down right click on the button and choose a longer delay.

---- FULLSCREEN ----

The fullscreen mode is a bit tucked away on Steem. To go fullscreen you
must click on the maximise box of the Steem Engine window. When in
fullscreen mode the Pause/Break key stops emulation, you can't release
the mouse and continue running. To go back to windowed mode, click on
the far right button on the Steem toolbar. You need DirectX installed on
your computer for fullscreen to be possible.


---- CONFIGURATION ----

The buttons on the right side of the window are for configuring the
emulator.

---- THE DISK MANAGER ----

On the far right is the disk manager. Clicking on the button will make
it appear, clicking again will make it disappear. This window controls
all the disks on the ST, the 2 boxes up the top hold the disks currently
in the drives. The large box at the bottom shows all the disk images in
the current directory. The disk manager is like a little explorer
window, you can go into a folder by double clicking on it or selecting
it and pressing return. All disk image files, zip/rar archive files and
any Windows shortcuts to those types of files are shown. 

.Disk Images
Disk images are floppy disks turned into files, this is how most
programs are accessed on ST emulators. To put a disk in a drive, drag it
to the box to the right of the big drive icon. To remove it from the
drive just drag it back out to the directory view. If you right click in
the directory view a menu will pop up allowing you to create a new
standard size disk image, a custom size disk image or a folder. Custom
disk images can be up to 2 megabytes in size, although larger ones are
emulated correctly most TOS versions didn't support them, you may find
they will only work with TOS 2.06 or maybe not at all.

.Hard Drives
The other important button on the disk manager is the Hard Drives button
which brings up the hard disk manager when you click on it. You can have
up to 10 virtual hard drives, to set one up select the folder on your PC
and then select the letter that you want it to be on the ST. Hard drives
aren't as reliable as disk images, most things will work but not
everything. If a program isn't working properly copy it to a disk image
(using the ST desktop) to see if that helps. Another option in this box
is to choose which hard drive to boot from if floppy drive A is empty.
This means that programs from the AUTO folder on that hard drive will be
loaded (please note that GEM's configuration file DESKTOP.INF and ACC
files are always loaded from drive C if there aren't any on the floppy).
Another useful feature is that when you run Steem after it has been
reset you can force booting from a hard drive even if there is a floppy
in the drive by holding down the CONTROL key when you run.

.Home Folder
The disk manager allows you to select a home folder. This is where all
your disks or links to disks should be stored. You can go to your home
folder at any time by clicking the third button from the left in the
disk manager window.  If you are away from your home folder you can
quickly move/copy/create links to disks in your home folder by right
mouse button dragging them to the home button. The button to the right
of the home folder button sets the current folder as your home folder.
Right-clicking on the home button and the set-home button brings up
menus allowing you to go to/set 10 quick-folder links.

The next button brings up a list with a few useful options:

.Check Inside All Zips
When checked this makes Steem investigate all compressed ZIP/RAR archive
files in a directory to see if they contain a disk image before
displaying them. If you have a lot of archives (or shortcuts to
archives) in one directory this option being checked can cause it to be
slow to display.

.Hide Broken Shortcuts
This option hides shortcuts which point to a file that doesn't exist. If
you show these shortcuts then you can right click on them and select Fix
Shortcut to allow Windows to search for the target file. You may want to
check this if you have many broken shortcuts that are going to stay
broken to speed up displaying of their folders.

.Eject Disks When Quit
This makes Steem eject all the disks from the drives when you quit.

.Open Current Folder in Explorer
Opens the folder the disk manager is looking at in Windows Explorer.

.Folders Pane in Explorer
When checked causes the folders pane to appear when you open a folder in
Explorer.

.Find in Current Folder
Opens a Windows find dialog with the "Look in" directory set to the
current folder, useful if you have a large number of disks in many
folders and you want to find one quickly.

.Import WinSTon Favourites
Clicking on this option brings up a dialog box that allows you to create
shortcuts from WinSTon's favourites system. First select the folder
containing WinSTon which has the favourites you want to import. Next
select the folder that contains WinSTon's disk images (usually called
discs). Now select a folder to import the favourites to. The option Only
Downloaded Disks when checked causes Steem to only create shortcuts to
disks that already exist, when unchecked Steem could end up creating
thousands of broken shortcuts which will become unbroken if you download
their target disk using WinSTon. The last option tells Steem what to do
if the shortcut already exists at the required location, if you set this
to skip then it would be quite quick to import the favourites again if
you download a new disk through WinSTon you want to use in Steem (thus
avoiding creating loads of broken shortcuts).

.Double Click On Disk...
This allows you to configure what happens when you double click the left
mouse button on a disk image (or a shortcut to a disk image). By default
doing this will load the disk into drive A, reset the ST and then run.

.Large/Small Icons
Save space with small icons.


---- JOYSTICKS ----

The button to the left of the disk manager configures joysticks. Steem
allows you to use any Windows compatible joystick in any way you want to
control up to 8 ST Joysticks. 

The first option is what method to use for reading joysticks, Windows
Multimedia should work fine for most joysticks but if you have problems
(or if you have more than 2 joysticks) try DirectInput. 

The next option allows you to select one of 3 configurations for the ST
joysticks, this is useful if you want to switch between different setups
quickly.

Now it is time to configure the ST joysticks themselves, the important
joysticks are the ones that went into the main ST ports (under the
keyboard), but you can also set up ones that went in the STE only ports
(next to the cartridge slot) and the rare parallel port joysticks (the
ones that went where the printer did). You will see that there are 2
identical boxes, when "Standard Ports" are selected the left side
configures the ST joystick that would have gone in the mouse port. The
right side is for the joystick that would have gone in the joystick
port. 

.Input Pickers
Steem uses a unique system for allowing a user to choose how they want
to control the ST and the emulator. In the joystick dialog you will see
light grey boxes that go white when you click on them, these are input
pickers. When white you are able to press any key, move/press a control
on any joystick (axis/POV/buttons) or press the middle mouse button (you
must click on the input picker) to choose that as the input. There is
one special key, Pause/Break that will make an input picker blank. Left
and right shift (and left/right alt/control on Windows NT) will normally
be treated as separate keys, if you want Steem to allow either key then
press them both at the same time. If you want to use the tab key as
input then you have to hold down control while pressing it (otherwise it
switches the focus to the next control). For each joystick there is one
input picker for left, right, up, down, fire and autofire. 

.Autofire
Autofire is turned on by selecting a speed, when it is on activating the
selected input will act as if you were pressing and releasing the
joystick's fire button very quickly again and again. This is handy for
games that won't allow you to hold down the button to fire multiple
shots or the like.

.Deadzone
Clicking with the left mouse button in the middle box sets the
dead-zone, this is the distance an analog joystick axis has to move
before it counts as being pressed. 
There are 3 options for active joysticks, "Always" which will mean that
the selected input will always control the joystick (and will not be
passed on to the ST in the case of a key). "When Scroll Lock On" and
"When Num Lock Off" mean that the joystick will be off unless the
specified key is toggled the correct way. This is useful if you have got
one of the joysticks using the keyboard, as the selected keys won't
count as key presses while they are used by an active joystick.

.Mouse Speed
This is a useful option if you have a mouse that is designed to move
around a 1600x1200 screen and it is moving on a 320x200 screen on Steem.
I know this isn't technically a joystick configuration option, but it
went in the same port!

.Oddities
It seems that some keyboards won't allow certain keys to be pressed at
the same time. For example left cursor key, up cursor key and space. If
you find the keyboard controlled joystick unresponsive try altering the
key assignments, like making shift or control fire. There is also a
problem with holding shift and pressing numpad 4,6,8 or 2 at the same
time, Windows handles these combinations very poorly so it is best to
avoid using them for anything.


---- MACHINE CONFIG ----

The button to the left of joysticks sets up the hardware of the ST. In
this simple box you can set memory size, monitor type, cartridge,
keyboard language and TOS version. 

Monitor type can be "Colour" (for ST low and medium resolutions) or
"Monochrome" (for ST high resolution). Also available are extended
monitors, these are larger screens than a standard ST could manage but
are achieved by some tinkering with the ST operating system. The only
programs that have any chance of working with extended monitors are GEM
applications (windows/menu bars), all other programs will crash or make
a mess of the screen (there is nothing that can be done about that).
Most GEM apps will fail too, but some will work and allow you to fit
more on the screen than anyone could ever need! NOTE: Extended monitors
only work with TOS versions above 1.02, also if you use a 4 plane
resolution (e.g 800x600x4) the ST can get very confused if it tries to
change to medium resolution, so try to avoid it.

The TOS version box finds all valid TOS images in the directory that
Steem.exe is in and also in your home folder. Warning: There are lots of
corrupt versions of TOS 1.06 and 1.62 UK around, if one of those TOSs
doesn't work for you then it is not Steem's fault! Also TOS 1.00 has
many bugs in it, best to avoid using that unless a game insists on it.

There is one more complex option that affects non-English keyboards. If
keyboard language is set to certain languages then the "Shift and
alternate correction" option will become available. When checked this
makes Steem do its best to get round the differences between ST and PC
keyboard layouts by fooling the ST into thinking you are pressing keys
you aren't. This works well for GEM programs but it could cause problems
for games and any other program that reads the keyboard directly. Note:
When typing use the TOS version that matches your PC keyboard, if you
have an AZERTY keyboard then don't expect a US TOS to recognise it
properly, only a French TOS will work anywhere near correctly.


---- OPTIONS ----

The button to the left of machine config sets up loads of options.

o GENERAL

.ST CPU speed
Here there's an option to boost the speed of the emulated ST, to improve
those painfully slow games you could get for the ST. The ST's CPU ran at
8 Megahertz (8,000,000 clock cycles per second) but here you can whack
it up to get things going faster.  A couple of points: setting the CPU
speed above 8MHz will cause the emulator to run _slower_, because it has
more processing to do for each screen displayed.  It will also cause
some ST programs to crash/not work properly, because they rely on the
processor running at the correct speed.

.Run speed
Sometimes you will find a game/program that isn't significantly affected
by changing CPU speed, it is still too slow. In that case you can use
this option to change the speed Steem runs and make sure a program
speeds up (or even slows down if you want). The disadvantage is that
sound doesn't work above 105% or below 80%.

.Slow motion speed
This option determines how fast Steem will run when you have slow motion
turned on (right-click on the green play button).

.Maximum fast forward speed
Using this option you can limit Steem's speed, fastest isn't always best
(you can find you have zipped through the bit you wanted to see).

.Pop-up hints
This little option toggles those pop-up hints on and off, now you've
read the readme you don't need them really.

.Make Steem high priority
When this option is ticked Steem will get first use of the CPU ahead of
other applications, this means Steem will still run smoothly even if you
start doing something in another window at the same time, but everything
else will run slower.

.Pause emulation when inactive
When this option is checked Steem will pause emulation when you switch
to another program. Steem uses a lot of PC CPU time when running which
slows all other programs down, if you are switching between programs
regularly you may want to use this option.

.Disable system keys when running
This option allows you to send certain key combinations that are used by
Windows to the ST instead. When it is checked Alt+Tab, Ctrl+Esc and
Ctrl+Alt+Delete will go to the ST instead of to the PC. Although Steem
is very stable this option could cause a bit of a disaster is Steem
stops responding for any reason, you won't be able to shut it down with
Ctrl+Alt+Delete, for safety it is best to only use this option when you
really need it. Unfortunately this option doesn't always work in
fullscreen mode. Depending on your version of Windows, it may not be
possible to capture certain key combinations - you can use shortcuts
(see below) to trigger the keys you want from other keys. 

.Automatic fast forward on disk access
Sometimes disk access can be really slow, so this option makes Steem
always fast forward when the ST is doing it. There are some programs
that continue while accessing the disk, if you are going to use one of
them then you should turn this off.

o SOUND

.Output type
This can be "None" to make no sound at all or "Sound Chip Sound" to make
sounds like the Yamaha 2149 sound chip that was in the ST coming through
a standard speaker. "Emulator Sound" makes Steem emulate the sound chip
in the way almost all other ST and Yamaha 2149 emulators do, this isn't
how most STs would have sounded but some people might prefer it (it is
also faster as it needs very little calculation). The last option is
"Sharp STFM Samples", this makes Steem switch automatically to emulator
style sound when a sample is being played (please note this doesn't work
for all samples).

.Configuration
These options allow you to tweak the sound output, firstly volume, best
to leave that around Max. Next is frequency, most sound cards can handle
50066Hz but if sound is a bit dodgy then you can go down to 44100Hz, if
that doesn't work try 25533Hz (it will be quite muffled). The next
option is format, 8-bit mono should be adequate for most people and it
is the least stressful on the CPU. Then there is Write to primary
buffer, some sound cards seem to perform very badly with Steem's
standard output, try checking this if it doesn't sound perfect. Next is
timing and delay, these options were added in a desperate attempt to
improve output on some sound cards, if you are having problems fiddle
and see if they make any difference.

.Record
These options allow you to record Steem's output to a wav file. Clicking
on the red button begins recording, clicking on it again (or stopping
emulation) will end recording. You can choose the name and location of
the wav file to output by clicking on choose.

.Internal speaker sound
This is a bit of fun really, if you haven't got a sound card you can
make your internal PC speaker output Steem's sound, try it with a few
tunes!

o DISPLAY

.Frameskip
This is a very useful option for slower processors, drawing the screen
takes quite a bit of PC CPU time so skipping frames is a very effective
way to speed things up to the same speed as a real STE. Auto frameskip
makes Steem skip up to 8 frames dependant on how fast it is running. 

.Borders
Here you can choose whether you want to see the ST borders. Some games
use a technique called "overscan" to display graphics in the borders,
that's one reason you 
might want to see them.  The option "Auto Borders" will keep them turned
off most of the time, only coming on when there's an overscan.  You can
also choose to have borders always on or always off.  The border option
affects fullscreen mode: with borders on, Steem displays fullscreen in
the 800x600 screen resolution.  Auto-borders won't work so well in
fullscreen because we don't want to keep changing the PC monitor's
resolution; so if you are running a program in fullscreen that makes use
of the borders, turn on "Always Show Borders".

.On screen display
The Steem OSD is there to look pretty and give information. The blue bar
in the bottom-left corner indicates the current speed of the emulator
compared to the refresh rate of the monitor on a real ST - if the bar is
full it is drawing at the ST sync rate. The flashing yellow light in the
top-right comes on when the floppy drive is accessed. There are also
occasional scrolling messages that pop up to delight and inform you. 

.Window size
These options allow you to configure exactly the size of Steem's window
in the various ST resolutions. First is the option of whether Steem
should automatically resize its window when the ST resolution changes or
when borders turn on or off. Below that you can set the sizes that Steem
should use. WARNING: On some video cards making the size bigger than the
real size (the first option) will slow down emulation considerably.

When automatic resizing is off you may find it difficult to get the
window to a precise size, making ugly lines appear; to help there are
some options on the main window's system menu (accessed by clicking on
Steem's icon in its title bar).  Normal size will resize the window to
the size you have selected for the current ST screen resolution. Restore
aspect ratio will maintain the current size of the window but will alter
it so that its aspect ratio matches that of the selected size for the ST
resolution. Also on this menu is Bigger and Smaller Window, they are a
quick way to resize the window without going to the Options dialog, and
border settings, which also affects the size of the window. As well as
all that there's an always on top option that keeps the main Steem
window above all others.

.Screenshots
These options configure where screenshots are saved, to take a
screenshot set up a shortcut to perform the action "Take Screenshot". If
you have the FreeImage library (http://www.6ixsoft.com/) then you will
be able to choose the format that the screenshots will be saved in here.

o BRIGHTNESS/CONTRAST

Some PC monitors/video cards can be very dark, this can make the ST
display unrealistic, or even make some things that should be visible
black. Here are some simple options to fix this problem, just fiddle
with the two values until in the colour bar display you can see colours
above the number 2 and the colours above 15 and 16 are a different
shade.

o FULLSCREEN MODE

.Drawing mode
This is a bit of a confusing option, you really don't need to know what
the possible settings mean, but which is best will be different
depending on your computer's hardware, try them all to see which is
quickest. Fullscreen drawing mode also affects windowed mode when the ST
is in low res and the low res window is set up to be double size. Make
sure you try all the modes, it can make a big speed difference.

.Special effects
When you are in "Straight Blt" or "Screen Flip" drawing mode you can
apply some effects to Steem's display. "Scanline Grille" makes every
other vertical line black, this can make the display a bit dark but it
can also make Steem run quicker. "Blur" makes Steem's display look like
a really bad ST monitor, I had one that looked like this, until I
destroyed it while trying to make it work better.

.Use 256 colour mode
When checked this makes Steem use the 8-bit graphics mode - this is
faster but will not look good with very colourful games (for 8-bit mode
the maximum is 118 colours on screen at any time, most ST programs only
need 16). This option is very useful for high-res, because there are
only 2 colours to display and using 65536 or more seems excessive.  

.Use 640x400
This option makes the screen switch to 640x400 pixels when you run in
fullscreen. This means the ST display will fill the entire screen
instead of having small borders to the top and bottom. You can only use
640x400 mode when borders are set to "Never Show Borders".

.Synchronisation
When the PC and ST are displaying a different number of frames per
second you can get jerkiness and wobbling that didn't appear on a real
ST. Using these options you can hopefully put that right, Vsync to PC
display tells Steem to wait for the PC to be ready before it displays
its next frame. To make this option work better you should try and make
the PC refresh rate the same or double the ST one. The ST used 50Hz
(PAL), 60Hz (NTSC) and 70Hz (Mono).

o MIDI

Here's some options that affect the PC side of Steem's MIDI emulation.

.Volume
Not that useful but here never the less, it won't work for all devices.

.Allow running status for output/input
Normal MIDI messages are made up of one status byte that describes the
message and then 1 or 2 data bytes. If a program wants to send the same
message again it can leave off the status byte and just send the data.
By default Steem doesn't allow this and adds the status byte itself if
it has been omitted, this could cause problems to programs that require
a very high transfer rate. These options mean that running status will
be passed on to Windows which has to decide what to do with it, so if
you are having problems with MIDI tempo you can try this.

.System Exclusive Buffers
The number of system exclusive buffers affect MIDI when it is
sending/receiving many small system exclusive messages quickly. If the
number of buffers is too small it is possible for there to be so little
time between messages that Steem is still busy with all the buffers when
a new sysex message arrives (and therefore part of it gets lost). If you
find some MIDI program having input or output problems that sound like
this it's worth a try increasing the number of buffers, something like 6
should do the job for almost anything. The size of the buffers allows
you to choose the maximum length of message Steem can send or receive.
This is important if you are transferring large memory banks from the
device to the ST and vice-versa. 

.Input speed
This option allows you to slow down the speed Steem feeds any received
data from the MIDI device to the ST. Due to restrictions of Windows
Steem sends all data as fast as possible to the ST regardless of the
speed it was actually sent by the device, some ST programs can't handle
that. If you have problems with receiving bank dumps it might be an idea
if you slow this down a bit. Also related to this is the shortcut action
"Pause until next SysEx", this can get round time-outs on ST programs
waiting for a bank dump to start. See the shortcuts section for details
of how to assign this action to a key/combination of keys.

o STARTUP

.Restore Previous State
You can choose to have Steem remember the state of the ST when it quits,
so you can return to what you were doing next time you run it. Below the
option is a box where you can type in the filename that will be used to
save the state, this file will be saved in the directory Steem.exe is
in.

.Start in Fullscreen Mode
If DirectDraw is enabled and is working okay then you can make Steem
fill the whole screen when it first runs.

.Never Use DirectDraw/DirectSound
If you have DirectX errors when you boot up, or DirectX doesn't work
properly, then you can tell Steem to not use it. Sound doesn't work
without DirectSound and drawing is slower without DirectDraw.

.Sound Driver
This lets you configure which DirectSound driver Steem will use, Default
is usually the best option.

o AUTO UPDATE

This configures Steem's auto update program, it checks for when new
versions of Steem and new/updated patches are released. At the top are
some statistics for how well auto update is working. Below are a few
options to make it work better, or turn it off completely. When a new
version of Steem is detected a button will appear on Steem's toolbar.
When you click on it a box will appear with full details of the new
version and the choice whether you want to download it now, later or not
at all. Auto update will not work from behind a firewall, if you are
behind one disable auto update and join the Steem update mailing list
from the Steem website's download page.

o FILE ASSOCIATIONS

Windows programs love to associate and de-associate programs with file
types. This dialog allows you to choose which files you want to
associate with Steem. Just click the "Associate" button next to the
desired files. Here you can also choose whether you want files to open
in a new Steem window or the current Steem window when you double-click
on them from Windows Explorer.


---- EXTERNAL DEVICES ----

This dialog configures the emulated ST's link to outside hardware.

In this dialog there is a section for each port on the ST, MIDI,
parallel and serial. To set one up select one of the options from the
box next to "Connect To". When you do the section will fill up with
options related to the connection you chose. 

.MIDI Device
When you select this you must then select the PC MIDI device you want
the ST's messages to be sent to and the PC MIDI device you want to be
able to send data to the ST. 

.Parallel Port (LPT)
This allows you to connect an ST port to one of your PC's parallel
ports. The only option is to choose which one. Warning: This may not
work on all versions of Windows.

.COM Port
By selecting this option you can connect an ST port to one of your PC's
COM ports. Again, just select the required port.

.File
Using this option you can send all output from an ST port to a file.
Click on the "Change File" button to open the file selector where you
can select the output file (you can create a new one by typing in a new
name and clicking "Open"). The "Reset Current File" button will delete
everything that is currently in the file.

.Loopback (Output->Input)
Selecting this will cause anything that is sent to the port to be then
received by the port, what use that is I really don't know!


---- SHORTCUTS ----

In this dialog you can set keys, joystick buttons/axes and the middle
mouse button to do various actions.

The first thing in the dialog is a large box which displays some
instructions for people who haven't read the readme (this can be hidden
allowing you to see more shortcuts). Below that is the permanent
shortcuts box, these are shortcuts that you can't turn off, they will be
active all the time you are using Steem. In the box you should see at
least one default shortcut, for each shortcut there are 3 input pickers
(see joysticks section for a description of how they work) separated by
+. Next there is an = followed by a large box, this contains a list of
many actions that activating the selected combination of input will
cause. 

.Press ST Key
If you select "Press ST Key" then a box will appear to the right of the
action box and you can click on it to select the ST key that the
selected combination of inputs will press. In this box F11 will count as
the "(" key on the ST keypad, F12 will be keypad ")", Page Up is Help
and Page Down is Undo. The "Del" button deletes the shortcut. 

.Type ST Character
This is similar to the Press ST Key action but it allows you to choose
any character that the ST can produce with the current TOS, this is
handy if you have a strange keyboard layout and you can't get all the
symbols you need.

.Add New/Copy
Below the shortcuts are 2 buttons that allow you to create more
shortcuts, "Add New" creates a blank one and "Add Copy" creates one that
is the same as the shortcut above the buttons. If you create more
shortcuts than can fit in the box then a scrollbar will appear allowing
you to see them all, you are limited to a maximum of 30 shortcuts.

.Temporary Shortcuts
Below the permanent shortcuts are the temporary shortcuts. These work
the same way as the permanent shortcuts except you can have an unlimited
number of different sets of shortcuts. This can be useful for programs
that relied heavily on having every ST key exactly where it was on the
ST keyboard, you can use the shortcuts to remap the keys that are in the
wrong place by using the "Press ST Key" action. Another use is for games
that used a combination of joystick and keyboard control, you can remap
the keys used to joystick buttons/axes and control the whole game from
the joystick. Just select the shortcut set you want from the box, or add
one using the button.


---- PATCHES ----

Steem runs a lot of ST software (we estimate over 95%) but some programs
just won't work properly. Often when debugging them we find a way around
the bug, without being able to solve it. Now you can run these programs
by using Steem's patch system. Select the program you want to run on the
left and follow the instructions.


---- GENERAL INFO ----

The button to the left of shortcuts tells you a few "interesting" facts
about the emulator. Click on the tabs at the top to switch between
pages.


---- TIPS AND OTHER MISCELLANEOUS STUFF ----

Here's a few hidden features/bits of information that you might not know
about:

o Steem can save screenshots but it can be a bit difficult to find out
how. You have to open the Shortcuts dialog, choose what input will cause
one to be taken and set the action to "Take Screenshot".

o Right clicking on a file or folder in the disk manager can access some
very useful features that can save lots of time.

o Dragging things to the home button on the disk manager's toolbar is a
very quick way to move things around.

o The disk manager supports drag and drop of almost anything into it,
you can move/copy/create shortcuts into the current directory or insert
disks directly into the drives.

o Steem is not related to WinSTon in any way, as some people think - it
was written from scratch by us. It would have been difficult for even us
(masters of making programs worse) to transform the quite stable WinSTon
v0.5 to the unstable and buggy Steem v1.0!

o It is very easy to transport Steem between different computers without
losing all your settings. You need the files Steem.exe, steem.ini and
shortcuts.dat to be able to run Steem with your configuration intact.
All you need then is a TOS version that you will have to select the
first time you run Steem on the new computer. You might find it handy to
have unzipd32.dll too, then you can use zipped disk images.


---- COMMAND-LINE OPTIONS ----

Here are some useful command line options for Steem, the easiest way to
run Steem with them is to make a shortcut to Steem.exe, right click on
it and select Properties. In the text box labelled Target add the
command line options on the end (after the " if there is one).

NODD, GDI - don't use DirectDraw.

NODS, NOSOUND - don't use DirectSound.

.st, .msa, .stt, .dim, .zip, .rar, .stz file - load disk & go.

.sts file - load snapshot & go.

.stc file - insert specified cartridge.

NONEW - means that if one of the above files is passed to Steem and a
Steem window is already open it will be opened in the current Steem and
the new one will be closed.

OPENNEW - means the opposite of NONEW, the files will always be opened
in a new Steem window.

NOLPT - this removes the option to connect an ST port to your PC's LPT
ports (that option can cause a crash on some versions of Windows).

NOCOM - this removes the option to connect an ST port to your PC's COM
ports.

INI=[filename] - load [filename] instead of steem.ini.

TRANS=[filename] - use [filename] as translation file.

CUTS=[filename] - use [filename] instead of shortcuts.dat.

SOF=[freq] - stands for Sound Output Frequency. Output will be forced to
[freq]Hz and all other factors will be ignored (unless setting the sound
card output to [freq]Hz fails, in that case Steem will ignore this
option and use its usual method of determining output frequency).

WINDOW - force Steem to boot in windowed mode.

FULLSCREEN - force Steem to boot in fullscreen mode.

DOUBLECHECKSHORTCUTS - this makes Steem's disk manager check shortcut
files more thoroughly, some people have had problems when a shortcut's
target file name is in a different case to the actual file. This option
makes the disk manager slower to display folders with shortcuts in them.

SCLICK - this option makes Steem output a click when you run and stop
instead of a bump.

NOPCJOYSTICKS - don't look for any PC joysticks, sometimes joystick
drivers do some weird things!

OLDPORTIO - we changed how I/O to LPT and COM ports worked in v2.4, if
you are using Win9x/ME then you can use this switch if it doesn't work
any more.

ACCURATEFDC - this makes Steem attempt to emulate the STs Floppy Disk
Controller as accurately as possible, that may seem a good idea but wait
until you try it! It seems even slower than the real thing (it may be).
Also there are a few programs that work worse when we emulate it in this
tedious way, that is why it is a command-line option at the moment.
There are a few programs that this option fixes (such as Automation's
Jupiter's Masterdrive and Oxygene's STNICC demo) so it is worth a try if
you have problems with a program. This won't be permanent, we hope to do
some tests and emulate the FDC more accurately in future versions so it
isn't necessary.


That's it! You now know everything you need to know about The Steem
Engine. We hope you have fun using it.

---- CONTACT ----

We are very interested in people's comments about Steem. If you have any
or you have ideas for how we can improve it please e-mail us at
steem@gmx.net.

---- EMULATION BUG REPORTS ----

If you find an emulation bug please send an e-mail to: 

steembugs <at> gmx <dot> net

Please include the name of the program with the bug and preferably where
we can download it. Also the TOS image version number/country name, the
memory size and your ST monitor settings when the problem occurs. Please
don't send any big attachments (anything over 200Kb) without asking us
first.

---- STEEM CRASH REPORTS ----

If Steem crashes or freezes up on you then we want to hear! It is very
important to us that Steem is stable. Please send us an e-mail with as
much info as you can, tell us what you were doing when it crashed/froze,
if it was a one-off or a persistent error, and anything else you think
might be appropriate:

steem@gmx.net

NOTE: You don't need to include all the technical information that
appears in the Windows crash box, the name of the error might be useful
but the rest doesn't help at all.


Thanks for reading this file, or just scrolling to the bottom, I hope
you enjoy using Steem. Remember to check http://steem.atari.org/
regularly, updates are coming thick and fast! If you don't want to check
too often then you can join the Steem update announcement list to get an
e-mail whenever a new version is released, go to the Downloads page of
the Steem web site for details of how to join.

Readme written by Russell Hayward

---- LEGAL STUFF ----

THIS PROGRAM AND DOCUMENTATION ARE PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF
ANY KIND, NOT EVEN THE IMPLIED WARRANTY OF MECHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR
A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. BY USING THE PROGRAM YOU AGREE TO BEAR ALL RISKS
AND LIABILITIES ARISING FROM THE USE OF THE PROGRAM AND DOCUMENTATION
AND THE INFORMATION PROVIDED BY THE PROGRAM AND THE DOCUMENTATION.

