DR. T'S APPLICATION NOTE #1
USING THE PROGRAMMABLE VARIATION GENERATOR

The Programmable Variation Generator (PVG) is a tool for processing 
sequences and tracks in Dr. T's Level II Keyboard Controlled 
Sequencer. Because of the generalized approach of its design and 
implementation, the PVG is suited to a wide range of applications, 
from "humanizing" existing sequences to generating entire songs 
from a single note. Its Spartan interface can be a bit daunting to many 
first time users.

In this Applications Note, we'll be exploring some PVG applications 
developed by guitarist Randy Roos, an avid user of the KCS Level II. 
Randy uses the PVG primarily as a compositional tool, for creating 
parts that he otherwise would not have thought of. This note will 
center around a demo .VRY file that he has provided for us, along 
with some simple percussion tracks that can be used as "raw 
material" for the variations. 


PVG BASICS

Before we get into the details of Randy's variation presets, let's talk 
a little about the basics of the PVG. In case you aren't familiar with it, 
the PVG is a tool for introducing random and/or deterministic changes 
in an existing sequence or track. Its operations can be broken down, 
very roughly, into three parts: specifying what notes or controller 
events will be varied, selecting the operations to be performed, and 
setting the number of variations.

Most of these operations are handled within PVG presets, which are 
essentially snapshots of many of the settings on the PVG's screens. 
Presets specify which operations will be performed, their probability 
or number of executions, and which notes will be considered fair 
game for variation. On a higher level, macros can be used to link 
several presets together, and to specify the beats or events on which 
the preset(s) will or will not be used.


GUIDELINES FOR CREATING PRESETS

One confusing aspect of the PVG can be the distinction between 
random and deterministic (non-random) operations.

Notes are selected at random:

* When the CHANGES, SWAP/COPY, or SET VALUES screens are 
used.
* When PROTECTION is set to anything other than 10.

Operations are selected at random:

* When Changes per Vary is set to any value other than 0.
* In macros, if Ops is set to any value other than 0.
* In macros, if Lines is set to any value other than 0.

If you keep these rules in mind, you'll be able to control the kinds of 
randomness you introduce into the PVG's editing operations. For 
instance, if you want to transpose, erase, or otherwise affect all of the 
notes that meet certain criteria, use the GLOBAL1 or GLOBAL2 
screens. On the other hand, if you want to affect notes at random in 
the sequence, use the CHANGES, SET VALUES, or SWAP/COPY 
screens. Similarly, if you want to particular operation to be used each 
time you run a preset, set Changes per Vary to 0.

The notes that are affected by the variation operations are 
determined by the settings in the PROTECTION portion of the screen. 
(Even though this does not appear on the CHANGES screen, it still 
affect operations there.) Without going into detail on how protection 
works (it's all explained in the manual), it helps to think of each type 
of protection as a stencil that is placed over your sequence before it 
is spray-painted by the PVG. If some stencils have very few holes, or 
if the stencils are all aligned so that the "picture" is completely 
masked off, it's possible that none of the notes in the sequence will 
be available for variation (or unprotected), but if you adjust the 
stencils properly, you'll be able to superimpose patterns of changes 
on the existing notes.

The number of new copies, or variations, of the affected sequence, 
and their locations, are handled in the GENERAL OPTIONS section. 
The Variations setting determines how many modified copies of the 
sequence will be made, and the three buttons immediately below that 
determine where the variation(s) will be placed. If Overwrite Original 
is on, then the existing sequence will be replaced by the first new 
variation. The Consecutive Mults and Evolving Mults buttons deal 
with the way Multiple variations are handled. If Consecutive Mults is 
turned on, all of the variations will be strung end-to-end in the same 
sequence. This is intended primarily to see where a long evolving 
variation process takes the music, so if you want to make multiple 
"copies" of the sequence, turn this off. Similarly, the Evolving Mults 
button tells the PVG to use the last variation as the input for the next, 
which results in a continuous evolution (or devolution) of the 
sequence, rather than multiple "first generation" variations. This is 
primarily intended for composing with recursive structures (which is 
something most users won't want to dive into right away), so this 
should also be turned off for most applications. Reverse simply 
reverses the order of the multiple variations when Consecutive Mults 
is turned on, and is irrelevant otherwise, and Edit Mode is a 
convenience for use with simple editing presets, which is equivalent 
to setting Overwrite Original on and Variations to one. Setting the 
value beside PROTECTION to anything other than 10 is analogous to 
punching holes at random in the stencil, and is not useful in most 
situations.


A SIMPLE FIX

"Bass Fix" is an example of a variation preset that is easy to create 
(and understand), yet extremely useful. "Bass Fix" is a preset that 
randomly transposes notes in a part down by an octave. This is 
handy for improving a bass part that is not providing enough bottom, 
perhaps because it was transposed up in the process of building the 
song. The actual transposition operation is handled by the AMT of -
12, with a WGT of 1, in the Signed portion of the CHANGES screen. 
The PROTECTION settings are set wide open--that is, there are no 
protected notes. On the output side of things, however, the Pitch 
Limits in the RESTRICTIONS box prevent the preset from producing 
any notes that are too low.

An important part of making use of a random editing preset such as 
this one lies in setting the parameters in the GENERAL OPTIONS 
section properly. The Changes per Vary setting (which determines 
how many notes the PVG will vary) will be dependent on the number 
of notes in the sequence--if your sequence is twelve notes long, you 
might want to try varying six of them, or one, or all twelve. 
Consecutive Mults and Evolving Mults should probably both be 
turned off. Variations should be set to some number other than 1, 
perhaps 4 to 8, so that you can choose from several different 
versions of the edited sequence.

Many simple editing presets can be created and applied to a 
sequence in the course of an editing session, without bothering to 
store them. The first step when doing this should always be to click 
on CLEAR to clear the WGT settings on every screen; otherwise, you 
may end up with some unintended changes occurring.


PROCESSING PERCUSSION

The preset "Perc Var 1" is an example of a more complex preset that 
was designed for turning a repetitive percussion part into a more 
varied part that retains the same basic patterns and feeling as the 
original. (The file ROOS_PVG.ALL, on the demo disk, contains several 
percussion tracks that are useful as source material for this and the 
following percussion-oriented presets. Your drum machine or 
sampler should be set up with five hand percussion instruments on 
C4, D4, E4, F4, and G4 to work with these tracks. All of these tracks, 
other than track 2, were created by passing track 2 through the 
presets discussed here.) This preset makes use of both the 
CHANGES and SWAP/COPY screens. The Shift settings on the 
CHANGES screen introduce a little bit of looseness in the timing of 
the part, without throwing everything out of whack (as a simple Time 
change would do). The settings on SWAP/COPY screen "mix up" the 
order of the drums in three different ways, without changing the 
number of times that each drum is hit. Note that this preset makes no 
use of any pitch transposition operations, and that velocities are 
unaffected. This assures that no new notes are added to the 
sequence, and that the accents remain more or less intact.

Another way to spice up a repetitive drum part is to use the 
ORNAMENTS page to attach simple phrases to particular notes. "Perc 
Fills 1A" and "Perc Fills 1B" in the file ROOS_PVG.VRY are presets 
that add a three note lick to notes selected at random in the part.


Two things are worth pointing out here. The Pitch switch is set to Fix, 
which means that the values in the Pitch line near the top of the 
screen will be interpreted as absolute (fixed) values, rather than 
transpositions of the existing notes--an important consideration when 
working with drum parts. Another important point is the Tim setting in 
the PROTECTION section. Because the upper and lower limits are 
both 48 (an eighth note, in this case) and because the R (reverse) 
button is highlighted, all notes that are not preceded by an eighth 
note will be protected. (Preceded, of course, because the TIME value 
of a note determines the amount of time that passes before it occurs.) 
In order to make the ornament fall only on notes that are 48 steps 
long, the NTim (next time) fields would have to be used. In order to 
make ornaments fall only on specific beats, a macro would have to 
be used. (We'll talk about macros later.)

Stick Bounce is a variation of a simple echo ornament, that repeats 
the selected notes at decreasing velocities. In this preset, a slight 
irregularity in the timing of the echoes simulates the chaotic 
interaction of the motion of a stick and the surface it is striking. When 
applied to a cymbal sample (preferably on an instrument that allows 
multiple samples to overlap on the same note), or a vibe sound, this 
creates a stick bounce effect that is, in Randy's words, "frighteningly 
real".


CH-CH-CH-CHANGES

One of the most interesting techniques Randy has developed 
involves some simple "scale crunching" presets. These presets are 
used to force the notes in the processed sequence to fit into a 
particular key, simply by transposing any notes that don't fit the key 
up by a half-step. The "B Maj" preset  forces the selected material to 
fit with a B Maj chord. Several other scale crunching presets are 
included in the file ROOS_PVG.VRY.

This variation preset uses the GLOBAL1 screen. The variation 
parameters themselves are about as simple as they can be: a pitch 
transposition of one half-step up is given a weight of 1. The real key 
to this operation is found in the PROTECTION section, where the 
notes that will be transposed are specified. As you can see in the 
screen shot, the notes B, C#, D#, E, F#, G#, and A# (which make up 
the B major scale) are all protected from variation. The remaining 
notes will all be transposed up a half-step, which puts them in the 
scale. (Note that if your scale has gaps of more than a half-step--a 
very rare occurrence--transposing by a half-step would not work. In 
such instances, running the sequence through the same preset two 
or more times would do the trick.)

By applying different presets to different parts of a song, it's possible 
to "impress" a completely different set of chord changes on an 
existing song. (Just try doing that with a human band!) You could do 
this manually, by selecting ranges and then processing them with 
separate presets, or with the PVG's MACRO screen. We'll talk about 
this technique a little later, after we go over few more GLOBAL1 
editing applications.


OPEN MODE EDITING

If you prefer the use of OPEN mode to TRACK mode, you may miss 
the ability to edit channels independently. The GLOBAL1 screen is 
great for this type of thing, thanks to the availability of protection by 
MIDI channel. To turn GLOBAL1 into a deterministic editing tool, all 
you need to do is highlight the Edit Mode button, which is equivalent 
to turning on Overwrite Original and setting Variations to one. In this 
mode, the WGT settings on this screen set the number of times that 
each operation will be applied to all unprotected notes. As always, 
PROTECTION is used to determine which notes will be edited.

For instance, suppose you have a single OPEN mode sequence with 
drums on channel 10, bass on channel 1, and piano on channel 9, 
and you want to erase the snare drum part, which is assigned to note 
E3. The preset for this "stencil" is "Erase Snare".

The only criteria you're using to select notes for editing are channel 
and pitch, so these are the only fields in the PROTECTION section 
that are used--all others are left "open". Both the channel and note 
that are being selected for editing are specified by turning on the R 
(reverse) buttons, and then specifying the range to unprotect. In this 
case, the range is only one note or channel, so the top and bottom 
values are the same. Setting Erase to one tells the PVG to erase the 
unprotected notes. If you had wanted to accent the snare, rather than 
erasing it, then setting the WGT for Velocity transposition to one, 
along with an AMT of 12 or so, would do the trick. Similarly, you could 
select a single channel and transpose its pitch, or select two 
contiguous channels and erase all notes that fall below a minimum 
velocity, or perform other editing operations on selected notes, just 
by fiddling with the WGTs and PROTECTION settings.


HUMANIZING SEQUENCES

The process of humanizing sequenced music, by putting small 
random changes in a part, has been a hot topic in recent months, and 
one that the PVG is ideally suited to. If you find that a part that has 
been entered in step-time, or a part that has been auto-corrected, is 
too "stiff", then try applying the following preset to the sequence or 
track.

The "Humanize" preset simply induces small, random changes in the 
timing of the randomly selected notes. Because Shift is used (rather 
than Time), only the timing of the affected notes is changed. (For 
most PVG operations that involve any type of time manipulations, 
you should use Shift rather than Time.) When Gaussian changes are 
used, the actual amount of the change is chosen at random, with 
most changes being less than the amount specified in the SD 
column. This particular preset is intended for use at the 
recommended clock resolution of 240 steps/beat. If you use 96 
steps/beat, then the SD value should be set to 1. Lower clock 
resolutions will result in sloppy parts, rather than subtle 
humanization. Changes per Vary should be set to about half the 
number of notes in the target sequence.


MACRO OPERATIONS

The purpose of the MACRO screen is to provide an easy way to apply 
multiple variation presets to a single sequence. Presets can be 
applied to the entire sequence, or to certain segments of a sequence, 
or at random, though in the interests of simplifying this explanation, 
we'll be ignoring the random aspect. You can also specify the order 
in which presets are executed, which can be very important in certain 
instances.

The heart of the MACRO screen is the preset list, which specifies 
which variation presets will be used, and what sections of the 
sequence they will affect. Selecting presets is easy to do--simply 
click on an entry in the table on the left side of the screen to add it to 
the end of the list, or type a new number in the two digit field on the 
left side of the list to change or delete an existing entry. (Note that 
these changes won't be displayed immediately--click on the Macro 
button in the MENU to redraw the screen.)

The complex part of a macro operation involves the four fields 
labeled From, To, Cyc, and Ops. These parameters specify the 
ranges over which the presets will be applied, and how many times it 
will occur. Ops determines how many variation operations from that 
preset will be executed. For deterministic (non-random) editing, this 
should usually be set to 0, so that the number of changes is 
determined by the WGT settings in the presets themselves. From, 
To, and Cyc, work in combination with the Range Unit setting at the 
bottom of the screen to set the range over which the preset will be 
applied. Normally, for any type of rhythmic editing, Range Unit 
should be set to Step, Beat, or Meas, since the Event setting won't 
usually have any one-to-one correspondence with musical time 
values. From and To set up the start and stop points of the range to 
be processed by the preset, in terms of the Range Unit, and Cyc sets 
the spacing between successive occurrences of the range. Use Step 
to process a small part of each cycle, and use Beat, or Meas to 
process longer chunks.

Another control on the MACRO screen that could complicate life for 
the beginning PVG user is the Lines setting. For deterministic editing, 
Lines should be set to 0. If it is set to a higher number, the PVG will 
choose that number of macro lines at random, and execute only 
those lines.


USING THE MACROS

Now that we know a little about how macros work, let's look at how 
they might be used. First we'll go back to the scale crunching 
example mentioned earlier. One possible application of this 
technique is shown in the macro "Minor Blues".

This macro forces the target sequence to fit a blues chord 
progression. The first thing that you should notice is that the Range 
Unit is set to Beat. A little basic division reveals that this pattern, 
which is 48 beats long, is equivalent to 12 bars in 4/4 time. Several 
different scale crunching presets have been specified for different 
sections of the progression, none of which overlap. One limitation of 
this particular macro, as it is currently programmed, is that it will only 
process the first 48 beats of a sequence; if you have a longer 
sequence that you wish to process, then setting the Cyc value for 
each line to 48 would cause each preset to be repeated at regular 
intervals throughout the entire track.

The potential applications of this technique are truly mind-boggling. 
How about forcing a Bach invention to fit the chord changes of "Louie, 
Louie"? On a more practical level, here are some ideas you can use 
in creating your own music (or creatively deconstructing someone 
else's):

* Harmonizing a melody: Copy the melody to two or three tracks, then 
transpose them up or down by some fixed interval. Perhaps you 
could invert one track to create contrary motion, or time reverse a 
track. Now run each track through the macro, and presto! Diatonic 
harmonies!

* Modulating a melody: If one part of a tune uses a different chord 
progression than another part, yet you want to use the same melody 
in both (to maintain a sense of thematic coherence), just run the 
melody through a macro that follows the chord changes in the second 
part. Experiment with moving the melody forward or backward in time 
before processing it--this will affect which notes are changed, and 
could result in some interesting variations.

* Converting percussion parts to comping: Start with a good drum or 
percussion part, then layer it with itself, transpose some of the 
layers, or process it with the CHANGES screen, using the Interval 
option to increase the variety of notes in the sequence. Then run it 
through the macro. Randy has come up with an impressive 
demonstration of the PVG's capabilities where he uses this technique 
to turn a conga part into a very busy piano part, and then uses the 
sequencer's Live Edit function to erase some sections of the piano 
track.

* Play at random on your keyboard or guitar controller, then quantize 
(if necessary) and use a macro to give a sense of tonality to your 
playing. Who says "garbage in/garbage out"?


USING THE MASTER EDITOR

The Master Editor module is a sort of step-brother to the PVG--it was 
conceived at the same time that we were giving birth to the PVG (no 
small trick, that), but its features didn't quite fit the metaphor of the 
PVG. Hence, it got its own button on the Edit screen, but always gets 
second billing, as in "PVG and Master Editor". Still, the Master Editor 
has a lot of good music hidden away in it, even though it's not quite 
as outrageous as the PVG.

For example, the Chords page is great if you decide you want to 
experiment with different chord inversions. Say you want to fatten a 
series of chords by transposing the second highest note in each 
down an octave. First, set SORT to Descending, then enter a different 
channel number under position 2, then click on OK. What this does is 
sort the chords in descending order, and put the second note in each 
(which is the second highest) on its own MIDI channel. Now go to the 
GLOBAL1 page in the PVG, and transpose the notes on the new 
channel down an octave. (Unprotect all notes except those on the 
original channel, then set a transpose amount of -12, a weight of 1, 
then highlight Edit Mode and click on OK.) Finally, go to the  
Transform menu, and put everything in the sequence or track back on 
the original channel.

Jeff Baker has come up with a way to use the Master Editor to enter 
the pitches and rhythm of a part to entered separately, with the Match 
Pitches function on the BLEND page. This is especially useful if a 
part involves tricky fingering, and has a consistent "density" 
throughout (four note chords in the left hand, for example). Here's 
how it's done.

First, record the part's rhythm on your keyboard. There is no need to 
play the proper pitches at this point, since they will be added later, 
but it is critical to get the proper number of notes in each chord. Now 
go into step-time recording, and enter the notes in the part one at a 
time, using a separate track or sequence. In this step, of course, the 
rhythm doesn't matter. Next, select the rhythm sequence for editing, 
go to the Master Editor's BLEND page, and enter the number of the 
pitch sequence (or track) as the reference sequence. All of the options 
on the BLEND screen should be turned off except for the Match 
Pitches switch. After you click on OK, the notes in the rhythm 
sequence will be replaced by the notes from the pitch sequence, and 
the part will be complete.


REFERENCES

A few articles on the PVG have been published in some of the major 
trade magazines, which we suggest you seek out if you want more 
information. The June 1989 issue of Keyboard contained a clinic on 
the KCS, which described many innovative KCS and PVG techniques. 
Also, the August 1989 issue of Electronic Musician has an article on 
the PVG which covers both beginning and advanced applications.





